White Privilege
[Greg Rickel] I’d say in the white world,
we’re all over the map about what it means
and whether it’s real or not.
If you just bring up white privilege,
you’ve already got divisiveness in the room.
[Tariqa Waters] We’ve existed in it
without even knowing the word for it, I feel.
[M. Lorena González] White privilege
is the acknowledgment that our country
has a deep-seated conflict in history
with race, and that that history has brought us
to a place where white skin affords you
a greater amount of access to opportunity
than if your skin wasn’t white.
[Keli Carender] It almost seems like you're
accusing somebody of either not having
good intentions or of not deserving
what they have in life
or not having worked for it.
[Rachael DeCruz] You’re not a bad person
by benefitting from white privilege, right?
You didn’t really have any choice
in the matter. But you do have a choice
in kind of how you engage with the world.
[Jerrell Davis] And here’s the thing
about not acknowledging white privilege:
it’s that you internalize that superiority.
[Sean Riley] I can look at the currency
of our country and everyone on the currency
has the same skin tone as me,
which reaffirms certain notions about power.
You can go to a hotel and expect
the shampoo to work with your kind of hair.
[Autumn Bennett] Hotel shampoo is crap,
so who cares? Black people can’t get, like,
black Band-Aids, and that’s white privilege?
Band-Aids? I mean, come on.
It’s these little things that I’ve heard...
[Tariqa Waters] So, my mom would braid
my hair all the time, and it was really long.
And I was over at my grandmother’s house,
and I said, you know, “I want to be white.”
She almost slapped me across my face
and she said, “Why?” I said,
“Because I wouldn’t have to braid my hair.”
You know, just these things of just being
able to be free in the world
without all these restrictions.
I saw that as this oppressive thing.
[Rachael DeCruz] White privilege is the fact
that you don’t have to think about your race.
And when you’re not white, you do
confront that on a daily basis.
You're reminded on a daily basis
that you’re not white—whether it be
seeing yourself represented in the
political structure, in the media,
in our education system.
[Cynthia Tee] When you’re favored,
sometimes you just don't even
really realize you’re favored.
[Darrell Hillaire] You have no idea.
That’s what white privilege means.
You have no idea.
[Jerrell Davis] Privilege itself is a concept.
Ain’t nobody gonna disagree
that privilege exists, right?
As a male, I have privilege.
[Louis Chude-Sokei] There’s male privilege,
there’s heterosexual privilege...
[Autumn Bennett] I don’t have any.
Wait: I do have privilege.
It's very confusing. I read the list
of privileges a while back and I just was,
like, “What?!” Like the able-bodied
privilege and female privilege...
[Louis Chude-Sokei] And there’s also
the privilege of, you know,
being an American. First-world privilege,
even if you’re from Ranier Flats, right?
Or West Oakland.
[Keli Carender] Anybody can be privileged;
I actually think every group has
has certain privileges.
[Mark Olsen] I absolutely think
there's privilege. Sure, sure.
Different people are privileged differently
than other people. And I think if you look
statistically in America right now,
I think you would... I think we would
find that white people tend to be more
privileged than non-white people.
With that being said, though,
I’m very hesitant to say there is white...
all white people are privileged,
therefore there is white privilege.
[Lucas Nydam] You can grow up poor and white
and still have white privilege,
because it’s white privilege.
It doesn’t mean you’re privileged
in everything. It just means
you’re privileged because of your race
over people of other races.
[Rachael DeCruz] So I think people
sometimes, when they experience oppression
in other areas, tend to not see
the privilege that’s in their lives.
[Louis Chude-Sokei] We say, "You have
white privilege” to someone who's
working five jobs or someone
who can’t get into this school…
It doesn’t really communicate anything
to them, and it just generates resentment.
[Sean Riley] I think my skin color
enhances my freedoms to and my freedoms
from things. I don’t have to worry
about my skin color being a detriment
to getting a loan
or to my possibility of getting a job.
[Michael Dixon] White privilege means
that you can just be.
The things that are available to you,
you can get. The things that are available
to me, sometimes I can get,
sometimes I can't.
[Varisha Khan] White privilege is
being able to speak out—about your country,
about your government, about politics—
without being seen as unloyal or unpatriotic.
[Leija Farr] Look at the media and, like,
look at what images they show you as beautiful.
Look at what images they show you as powerful.
[Duck Bae] Since you don’t look like
this beautiful ideal, and because
that idea happens to be white,
that is the cause of a lot of
internalized racism. Things like that
make it difficult to hold within you that
kind of pride of the unique beauty that
your race and that you, yourself, hold.
[Autumn Bennett] “White people have had,
like, such a better chance in this world.”
Like, no, actually.
Because slavery was over a hundred years ago.
You weren’t involved. None of us were.
We don’t have to piggyback on a
poor and bad legacy.
[Louis Chude-Sokei] White privilege is
the accretion of history that,
whether you were involved in it or not, directly,
directly, has accrued over time
into your very sense of self and
manifests in how you relate to the world.
[Jerrell Davis] When you give somebody
historical context, to me, it's hard
to deny the truth. And people that say
they don’t have white privilege—
like, “I worked for everything I got”—
I mean, I think even that speaks to white privilege.
to white privilege. And this idea that
we can pull ourselves up by our bootstraps?
That’s just bullshit. Like, you better
give some credit to the people
that are around you,
because they help you survive.
[Lucas Nydam] Just talking with my stepdad,
in general, he’s like, "Oh, I worked hard
my whole life.” And I'm like, "I'm sure
you did, but you also started higher up
on the ladder than other people
of other colors and other backgrounds.”
A lot of times people like to think that
everything we do is a result of our
own actions, which is not necessarily
the case, of course.
[M. Lorena González] There is no question
that white folks—even those who come from
a disadvantaged socioeconomic background—
have difficulties and challenges.
But when you are a person of color,
those struggles, those barriers,
are deeper and more profound.
And white privilege is an acknowledgement
that we are not starting at an equal place.
That communities of color need
a head start, if you will,
just to get to the same start line
that our white counterparts are at.